Kafka Node Pools (#77)
strimzi/proposals: 050-Kafka-Node-Pools.md

* Different storage configuration (the nodes might have different storage class, but not storage size or a different number of disks)
* Different scheduling rules (affinity, tolerations, ...)
* Different Kafka configuration (regardless whether the option is configurable per-node or per-cluster in Kafka, we always manage it per-cluster)
* Running in different Kubernetes clusters

While from time to time these limitations were raised by the users, they were for a long time acceptable and not in general demand.
However, lately there seems to be increased demand for various features which require different configurations for different nodes.
This proposal does not aim to solve all of these but rather to provide a basis for solving them.

### ZooKeeper-less Kafka

Kafka is slowly finishing the implementation of the KRaft mode.
The KRaft mode removes the ZooKeeper dependency and replaces it with Kafka's own controller nodes based on the Raft protocol (_KRaft = Kafka + Raft_).
In the KRaft mode, the Kafka cluster will consist only from Kafka nodes.
But they will have different roles - they will be either controllers, or brokers, or will combine both of them.

> The controller role means the node is responsible for maintaining the cluster quorum, for the elections, discovery etc.

Author: Sorry, I'm not sure what you mean with this.

> The controller role means the node is responsible for maintaining the cluster quorum, for the elections, discovery etc.

Reviewer: I meant that controllers are in charge of handling cluster metadata instead of ZooKeeper.

* `template` for customizing the pods and other resources which are part of the nodes in this pool
* `jvmOptions` for customizing the JVM configuration

For example:

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: KafkaNodePool
metadata:
  name: my-pool
  # ...
spec:
  replicas: 3
  resources:
    requests:
      memory: 8Gi
      cpu: 2
    limits:
      memory: 8Gi
      cpu: 4
  jvmOptions:
    -Xms: 2048m
    -Xmx: 2048m
  storage:
    type: jbod
    volumes:
      - id: 0
        type: persistent-claim
        size: 100Gi
        deleteClaim: true
  template:
    podSet:
      metadata:
        labels:
          key1: label1
    pod:
      terminationGracePeriodSeconds: 60
```

The replicas and storage sections will be required in `KafkaNodePool`.
The other fields will be optional.
At the same time, the replicas and storage sections will be made optional in the `Kafka` resource since when using node pools, they will not be used in the `Kafka` custom resource anymore.

When the optional field is not present in `KafkaNodePool` and is present in `Kafka.spec.kafka`, it will default to the configured value from the `Kafka` CR.

> However, this will be applied only on the highest level.

Author: The examples below that line should explain it. It essentially means that the check will be done only at the highest level. For example ... when `KafkaNodePool.spec.jvmOptions` exists and has `-Xmx: 1024m` and `Kafka.spec.kafka.jvmOptions` exists as well with `-Xms: 512m`, the `KafkaNodePool.spec.jvmOptions` will be used and `Kafka.spec.kafka.jvmOptions` will be ignored. They will not be merged together.

> However, this will be applied only on the highest level.

Reviewer: I missed one thing in the example ... `-Xmx` vs `-Xms` ... it was not the same parameter to be overridden. 
I see what you meant now but "... highest level" is not clear. Maybe we should make clear that any `KafkaNodePool.spec.<field>` takes precedence over the corresponding `Kafka.spec.kafka.<field>`, or something like that?

That means that when a node moves from one pool to another, all the resources will be recreated including the per-node services or storage.
It is not possible to re-use these things not just because of the naming concerns, but also because the different pools might have different configurations and the old resources might not be re-usable.
So a node which moves will start from _zero_ with empty disk and will need to re-sync all the data.

### Matching the node pools to the Kafka cluster

A particular `KafkaNodePool` resource can belong only to a single Kafka cluster.
The node pools will use the same mechanism to define to which cluster they belong as we use today for `KafkaConnector`, `KafkaTopic` or `KafkaUSer` resources.
`strimzi.io/cluster` label will be set on the `KafkaNodePool` and its value will be the name of the `Kafka` custom resource to which it belongs.
For example, the label `strimzi.io/cluster: my-cluster` will mean that this node pool belongs to a Kafka cluster named `my-cluster`.
The `Kafka` and `KafkaNodePool` resources always have to be in the same namespace.

#### Example

> The following example shows how the `Kafka` and `KafkaNodePool` resources might combine:

Reviewer: I would clarify "... to set up a Kafka cluster with 6 brokers in total", just to make clear to users that now they have to familiarize with not just one `replicas` field if using more node pools but taking into account the sum of them.

But the `scale` sub-resource would make it easier to develop such solutions in the future.

### KRaft support

To support the Kafka KRaft mode, a new field `role` will be added to the `KafkaNodePool` as well.
It will contain a list of roles (`controller` or `broker`) which the nodes in given pool should have.
This will allow to use different configurations.
For example, for a small cluster with shared broker and controller responsibilities:

```yaml=
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: Kafka
metadata:
  name: my-cluster
  namespace: my-namespace
spec:
  kafka:
    version: 3.4.0
    listeners:
      - name: plain
        port: 9092
        type: internal
        tls: false
      - name: tls
        port: 9093
        type: internal
        tls: true
    config:
      offsets.topic.replication.factor: 3
      transaction.state.log.replication.factor: 3
      transaction.state.log.min.isr: 2
      default.replication.factor: 3
      min.insync.replicas: 2
      inter.broker.protocol.version: "3.3"
  # ...
---

apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: KafkaNodePool
metadata:
  name: mixed
  namespace: my-namespace
  labels:
    strimzi.io/cluster: my-cluster
spec:

>   role:

Reviewer: maybe using the plural `rules` as it is in the Kafka configuration?

Author: Good point. We seem to use the plural form for list fields in our APIs as well. Thanks.

To allow the operator to keep track of the assigned node IDs, it will keep track of them in the `.status` section of the `KafkaNodePool` resource.
That way, it will be able to know at any point in time which IDs are used and which are available.
It will be also able to identify the scale-down or scale-up events using this information.

```yaml=
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: KafkaNodePool
metadata:
  name: big-nodes
  # ...
spec:
  replicas: 3
  # ...
status:
  nodeIds:
    - 0
    - 1
    - 2
  clusterId: cABpUKeDTqi7q_XOtBMgUv
  # replicas and labelSelector fields are needed for the scale subresource
  replicas: 3
  labelSelector: >-
    strimzi.io/cluster=my-cluster,strimzi.io/name=m-cluster-big-nodes,strimzi.io/kind=Kafka
```

User will be able to use annotations to indicate to the operator what should be the next ID when scaling up or what should be the node ID which should be removed when scaling down through annotations.
Setting an annotation `strimzi.io/next-node-ids` will tell the operator what should be the next ID used in scale-up.
The value might be a single number, list of numbers or one or more ranges.

> E.g. `[3]`, `[3, 4, 5]` or `[1000-1010]`.

Reviewer: Assuming the user have a node pool with 3 brokers (so ids 0,1,2) and `strimzi.io/next-node-ids: [3]`.
He scales up from 3 to 4 through the `replicas` field so operator will create broker id 3.
Then with same `strimzi.io/next-node-ids` annotation, the user will scale up again ... now ... because 3 is used, will the operator raise a warning about it but using id = 4 or failing the reconcile asking the user to fix the annotation? I think that not having consistency between current max id and the annotation value can drive to confusion.

Author: This is not part of my prototype - at least not yet. But the annotations are expected to be treated as an indication of what should be used next. So if we cannot fulfill them, we would pick up the next available ID and use it. This goes better with the ideas of autoscaling etc. It also IMHO better fits the concept of a list where some might be taken and some not etc.

Reviewer: > So if we cannot fulfill them, we would pick up the next available ID and use it

That's fine with me. At least just printing a WARNING like "ID 3 is already in use, picking the next available one 4"

  So with typical configurations (such as replication factor set to 3 and minimal in-sync replicas 2) any problem with one of the other node would mean loss of availability and cause that producers will not be able to produce messages anymore.
* Since the replica will not be in-sync, it would also mean that it might not be possible to proceed with rolling updates and other operations.

Due to these risks and limitations, users should instead of moving a node consider moving the partition replicas.
They should:
1) Scale up the target node pool to have a new node created
2) Reassign the partition replicas from the old node to the new node
3) Once the reassignment is complete, scale down the node pool with the old node

While this will cause a change of the node ID, it will be a more graceful process.
The reassignment process will first create a new replica and start copying the data.
Only when the new replica on the new node is in-sync, the old replica will be deleted.
Thanks to that, the availability is still guaranteed and other changes such as rolling updates are not affected.
This process should be also recommended to the users in the documentation.

> In the future, we should try to improve the Cruise Control support to make this process easier (maybe with a new rebalance mode `move-broker` or something similar).

Reviewer: While reading above I was wondering the same, so we should make clear that all the process is possible manually using the reassignment tool.

This is however not part of this proposal.

Despite the risks and limitations, having the ability to be able to move the nodes between node pools is still desired and might be useful.
So it should still be supported, even if it might not be part of the initial implementation.

### Deletion of the `KafkaNodePool` resource

When the `KafkaNodePool` resource belonging to an existing Kafka cluster is deleted, all the resources belonging to it and managed by it will be deleted.
This will also include the Pods and other resources.
The PVCs will be deleted only if the `deleteClaim` flag was set to `true` in the storage configuration.

> While it is possible that the user deleted the `KafkaNodePool` by mistake, once the resource is deleted, there is not much the operator can do about it.

Reviewer: if the users delete by mistake all node pool custom resources, what happen to the `Kafka` CR?
Or in general, when in the end we'll have migrated to node pools only, the user creates `Kafka` CR but forget to create corresponding `KafkaNodePool`(s) ... does the operator prints a warning, update status, nothing?

Reviewer: Ok makes sense. Thanks.

        cluster: my-cluster
    version: 3.3.1
    listeners:
      - name: plain
        port: 9092
        type: internal
        tls: false
      - name: tls
        port: 9093
        type: internal
        tls: true
    config:
      offsets.topic.replication.factor: 3
      transaction.state.log.replication.factor: 3
      transaction.state.log.min.isr: 2
      default.replication.factor: 3
      min.insync.replicas: 2
      inter.broker.protocol.version: "3.3"
  # ...
---

apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: KafkaNodePool
metadata:
  name: kafka
  labels:
    cluster: my-cluster
spec:
  replicas: 3
  resources:
    requests:
      memory: 64Gi
      cpu: 8
    limits:
      memory: 64Gi
      cpu: 12
  storage:
    type: jbod
    volumes:
    - id: 0
      type: persistent-claim
      size: 1000Gi
      class: fast-storage
```

Because the `KafkaNodePool` is named `kafka`, all the resources created by this configuration will be exactly the same and have the same names as today.

## Open Points

### Migration

The backwards compatibility / migration story seems weak.
The code already supports handling the original `Kafka` CR through the _virtual node pool_.

> Maybe we can use this and just find a way how to indicate if the user wants to use the `KafkaNodePool` resources or use the `Kafka` with the virtual node pool.

Reviewer: Without using the feature gate, can we think about something like this? 

A new Strimzi release starts to use the virtual node pool by default so that the code is handling node pools but still driven through only the `Kafka` CR.
If the user wants to explicitly move to use node pools, he creates one or more `KafkaNodePool` custom resources and on next reconcile, the operator will detect their existence and starts using them instead of the virtual one.

kind: Kafka
metadata:
  name: my-cluster
spec:
  kafka:
    nodePoolSelector:
      matchLabels:
        cluster: my-cluster
    version: 3.3.1
    listeners:
      - name: plain
        port: 9092
        type: internal
        tls: false
      - name: tls
        port: 9093
        type: internal
        tls: true
    config:
      offsets.topic.replication.factor: 3
      transaction.state.log.replication.factor: 3
      transaction.state.log.min.isr: 2
      default.replication.factor: 3
      min.insync.replicas: 2
      inter.broker.protocol.version: "3.3"
  # ...
  nodePools: 
    - name: pool1
      replicas: 3
      resources:
        requests:
          memory: 64Gi
          cpu: 8
        limits:
          memory: 64Gi
          cpu: 12
      storage:
        type: jbod
        volumes:
          - id: 0
            type: persistent-claim
            size: 1000Gi
    - name: pool2
      replicas: 3
      resources:
        requests:
          memory: 64Gi
          cpu: 8
        limits:
          memory: 64Gi
          cpu: 12
      storage:
        type: jbod
        volumes:
          - id: 0
            type: persistent-claim
            size: 1000Gi
```

> This would have some disadvantages:

Reviewer: these are advantages I guess :-)

For the initial implementation, the following options are proposed for the `KafkaNodePool` resource and its `.spec` section:

* `replicas` indicating the number of nodes in the pool
* `storage` indicating the storage of the nodes in this pool
* `resources` indicating the amount of resources (requests / limits) assigned to the nodes in this pool
* `template` for customizing the pods and other resources which are part of the nodes in this pool
* `jvmOptions` for customizing the JVM configuration

For example:

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: KafkaNodePool
metadata:
  name: my-pool
  labels:
    strimzi.io/cluster: my-cluster
spec:
  replicas: 3
  resources:
    requests:
      memory: 8Gi
      cpu: 2
    limits:
      memory: 8Gi
      cpu: 4
  jvmOptions:
    -Xms: 2048m
    -Xmx: 2048m
  storage:
    type: jbod
    volumes:
      - id: 0
        type: persistent-claim
        size: 100Gi
        deleteClaim: true
  template:
    podSet:
      metadata:
        labels:
          key1: label1
    pod:
      terminationGracePeriodSeconds: 60
```

The replicas and storage sections will be required in `KafkaNodePool`.
The other fields will be optional.

> At the same time, the replicas and storage sections will be made optional in the `Kafka` resource since when using node pools, and they will ignored if set.

Reviewer 2: I think there must be some words missing in "since when using node pools, and they will ignored"

Author: I have reworked this section.

When the optional field is not present in `KafkaNodePool` and is present in `Kafka.spec.kafka`, it will default to the configured value from the `Kafka` CR.

> So when `KafkaNodePool.spec.<field>` exists, `KafkaNodePool.spec.<field>` will be ignored.

Reviewer: I guess the second one you meant `Kafka.spec.kafka`.<field>` ?

In the future, additional fields might be moved from the `Kafka` resource to the `KafkaNodePool` resource and its `.spec` section according to the needs.
This proposal tries to minimize the effort and the scope and therefore picks up only some of the fields for the initial implementation.
Since the existing fields in the `Kafka` CR will be used as the _defaults_, new fields can be added to `KafkaNodePool` resource in the future without any backwards compatibility concerns.

### Resource naming

Each node pool will be represented by its own `StrimziPodSet` and pods running the actual nodes.
The `StrimziPodSet` will be created automatically by the operator based on the `KafkaNodePool` definition - it will not be created by the users.
The `StrimziPodSet` will be named `<ClusterName>-<PoolName>` - e.g. `my-cluster-big-nodes`.
The resulting pods will be named `<ClusterName>-<PoolName>-<ID>` - e.g. `my-cluster-big-nodes-5`.

> The naming of the related resources such as Services, Config Maps, or PVCs will follow the pod names.

Reviewer 2: I wonder if we should mention that this puts a bound on how long the combined `<ClusterName>-<PoolName>-<ID>` can be (due to the constraints that Kube has on resource names)?

      min.insync.replicas: 2
      inter.broker.protocol.version: "3.3"
  # ...
---

apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: KafkaNodePool
metadata:
  name: big-nodes
  namespace: my-namespace
  labels:
    strimzi.io/cluster: my-cluster
spec:
  replicas: 3
  resources:
    requests:
      memory: 64Gi
      cpu: 8
    limits:
      memory: 64Gi
      cpu: 12
  storage:
    type: jbod
    volumes:
    - id: 0
      type: persistent-claim
      size: 1000Gi
      class: fast-storage
    - id: 1
      type: persistent-claim
      size: 1000Gi
      class: fast-storage
---

apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: KafkaNodePool
metadata:
  name: small-nodes
  namespace: my-namespace
  labels:
    strimzi.io/cluster: my-cluster
spec:
  replicas: 3
  resources:
    requests:
      memory: 4Gi
      cpu: 1
    limits:
      memory: 4Gi
      cpu: 2
  storage:
    type: jbod
    volumes:
    - id: 0
      type: persistent-claim
      size: 100Gi
      class: regular-storage
```

#### Protecting `KafkaNodePool` resources from being shared between multiple Kafka clusters

The `strimzi.io/cluster` label should guarantee that the node pool will match only one Kafka cluster.

> Additional protection will be made against undesired moves between different Kafka clusters when the `strimzi.io/cluster` label is modified.)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Additional protection will be made against undesired moves between different Kafka clusters when the `strimzi.io/cluster` label is modified.
```

> The `.status` section of the `KafkaNodePool` resource will contain the Kafka cluster ID of the cluster it belongs to.

Reviewer 3: I think also having the node pools reflected in the `Kafka` status can be very handy to have a single view of the cluster. I can think also if it would reflect the ignored fields from the nodepools that can help users troubleshoot undesired Kafka setups. It can be limited to the case where there's a conflict to reflect the effective value.

Author: What exactly would you want to have reflected there? I'm open to ideas. But keep in mind that there are size limitations to what we can put there both from the CRD schema perspective as well as from the resource size limits.

For example:

```yaml=
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: KafkaNodePool
metadata:
  name: my-pool
  labels:
    strimzi.io/cluster: my-cluster
spec:
  # ...
status:
  # ...
  clusterId: cABpUKeDTqi7q_XOtBMgUv
```

The cluster ID is already part of the `Kafka` CR `.status` section.
The operator will check the cluster IDs in every reconciliation and if the cluster IDs don't match between the `Kafka` and `KafkaNodePool` CRs, it will expect that there is some kind of an misconfiguration.

> It will throw an `InvalidresourceException` and wait for the user to fix the issue.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It will throw an `InvalidResourceException` and wait for the user to fix the issue.
```

```

User will be able to use annotations to indicate to the operator what should be the next ID when scaling up or what should be the node ID which should be removed when scaling down through annotations.
Setting an annotation `strimzi.io/next-node-ids` will tell the operator what should be the next ID used in scale-up.
The value might be a single number, list of numbers or one or more ranges.
E.g. `[3]`, `[3, 4, 5]` or `[1000-1010]`.
Similarly, setting an annotation `strimzi.io/remove-node-ids` will allow to configure IDs of node which should be removed.
This will support only an ordered list of nodes IDs without ranges.
When the operator is adding or removing a node from the pool, it will look at these annotations and if they are set, it will use them to override the default mechanism for picking up the next node ID or the node to remove.
These annotations will be ignored when scaling is not requested by changing `.spec.replicas`.
If these annotations cannot be fulfilled (for example because the ID is already taken and already in use) they will be ignored and the next suitable ID will be picked up.

> The operator will raise a warning in its log in such case.

Reviewer 2: 1. I wonder if we should list exactly the cases which we'll cover. 
2. Is it enough just to log a warning?
3. I assume it's not allowed for these things to overlap between pools?

Author: > 1. I wonder if we should list exactly the cases which we'll cover.

Sorry, what exactly you mean here? what would be the cases?

> 2. Is it enough just to log a warning?

TBH, none of this is implemented so far. The prototype just picks the next ID right now. But my plan was to treat these as an indication and not fail when they don't fit. I think failing with error is a bit dangerous if you combine it with some auto-scaling mechanisms where the automated scale-up could possibly lead to reconciliation errors. But I guess its _open for discussion_.

> 3. I assume it's not allowed for these things to overlap between pools?

I do not see overlap as an issue. I can for example imagine that you would want to have your controller nodes from the 0-99 range and all your broker pools from 100-1000 range. I don't think the overlap causes any issues - since the node IDs are picked serially, it will simply always get the next free one.

The reassignment process will first create a new replica and start copying the data.
Only when the new replica on the new node is in-sync, the old replica will be deleted.
Thanks to that, the availability is still guaranteed and other changes such as rolling updates are not affected.
This process should be also recommended to the users in the documentation.

In the future, we should try to improve the Cruise Control support to make this process easier (maybe with a new rebalance mode `move-broker` or something similar).
This is however not part of this proposal.
Until this is implemented, the partition replicas can be moved also using the `kafka-reassign-partitions.sh` tool.

Despite the risks and limitations, having the ability to be able to move the nodes between node pools is still desired and might be useful.
So it should still be supported, even if it might not be part of the initial implementation.

### Deletion of the `KafkaNodePool` resource

When the `KafkaNodePool` resource belonging to an existing Kafka cluster is deleted, all the resources belonging to it and managed by it will be deleted as well.
This will also include the Pods and other resources.

> The PVCs will be deleted only if the `deleteClaim` flag was set to `true` in the storage configuration.

Reviewer 2: Mention the default?

## Proposal

This proposal suggests introduction of Kafka _node pools_.
_Node pools_ are groups of Kafka nodes which will have the same configuration.
A Kafka cluster can consist of one or more pools.
Each node pool can belong to only one Kafka cluster.

### `KafkaNodePool` custom resource

A new custom resource called `KafkaNodePool` will be added to Strimzi.
One `KafkaNodePool` resource will represent one _node pool_.
It will take over some of the configuration from the `Kafka` CR, reuse other parts from it and add some new configuration options as well.
The `KafkaNodePool` resource will be a _public_ resource.
It will be created and managed directly by users (unlike for example the `StrimziPodSet` resource which is used only internally by Strimzi and should not be touched by the users).

The _cluster-wide_ configuration options will remain part of the `Kafka` CR.
While the _pool-specific_ options will be taken from `KafkaNodePool` resources

For the initial implementation, the following options are proposed for the `KafkaNodePool` resource and its `.spec` section:

* `replicas` indicating the number of nodes in the pool

> * `storage` indicating the storage of the nodes in this pool

Author: And what would be the actual benefit? It would be quite complex in terms of implementation. Today, the proposal is changing the 1:N relationship (one Kafka CR to multiple pods) to N:M relationship (multiple NodePools against multiple pods). Having a separate storage configuration would change it to N:M:O relationship (multiple NodePools against multiple pods against multiple storage pools). 

It would also further complicate the user experience as even a very basic cluster (3 KRaft controllers + 3 brokers) would likely require at least two storage pools (different size for controllers versus brokers) and two node pools (controllers and brokers).

I'm not sure I understand the advantages it would bring. WDYM with vertical scaling in this case? The node pool can be vertically scaled -> you can just change the resources and/or storage size without any limitations.

> * `storage` indicating the storage of the nodes in this pool

Reviewer 4: I miss have miss understood, I had taken away the impression that the increase the resources available the node pool needed replaced as that's not the case it doesn't bring any advantage.I miss have miss understood, I had taken away the impression that the increase the resources available the node pool needed replaced as that's not the case it doesn't bring any advantage.

> * `resources` indicating the amount of resources (requests / limits) assigned to the nodes in this pool

Author: I did not consider this. From my experience, the majority of Strimzi users do not run large fleets of uniform clusters. They tend to either have a limited number of centrally managed clusters or many different clusters with different configurations. So I'm not sure this factory approach fits - I would be afraid it increases the complexity for both users as well as on the code level without too much added value.

You can probably also combine other tools such as GitOps to create a factory-style approach like this - for example with a Helm Chart which limits the configurability of some parts to decrease the complexity / increase the uniformity

> * `resources` indicating the amount of resources (requests / limits) assigned to the nodes in this pool

Reviewer 4: Yeah my background is definitely showing through :D 

Defaulting to the factory model probably would be a small increment in complexity for users managing small numbers of clusters and potentially pointing them towards a different pattern, which is probably more opinionated than the project want to be. I do wonder if we can find a middle ground, this ties in with [my thinking](https://github.com/strimzi/proposals/pull/77#discussion_r1162112642) around `stroagePools`, and support either an inline definition or a pointer to a `spec`. The default option would be an inline definition. 

To turn from the user complexity to the implementation complexity for a moment, again I don't actually think it's that large, or rather doesn't need to be. In my mental model the reconciliation would effectively split into two phases. An assembly phase stitching everything together (i.e. following the pointers to the `spec` definitions so as to appear as if inline) which would output a fully rendered model to the second phase of the reconciler which would then operate on that rendered model and thus wouldn't care if it contained pointers or inline definitions were used. 

I guess that would lead to questions about validation of the separate `spec` resources. I think, initially at least, they could just be handled like the inline version would be in the current proposal however there would be the option to validate them in a dedicated reconciler.

> * `resources` indicating the amount of resources (requests / limits) assigned to the nodes in this pool

Author: Sorry, I'm getting a bit lost and I'm still not sure I understand what would be the actual benefit.

The storage configuration is inlined already today and as part of this proposal. I also don't follow what you mean by the _factory model_. There is no factory here. The resources belong to a single unique cluster in a single namespace. There is no reuse. Especially with storage, which is mostly configurable at creation only, it would be quite hard to share the configuration and the changes would very quickly get completely out of sync without any real possibility to fix it.

For example - imagine someone creates the storage configuration for `gp2` volumes and uses it to create cluster A. And then changes the _shared_ storage configuration to `gp3` and creates cluster B. Suddenly, you have a single storage configuration that is always invalid for either cluster A or cluster B.

> * `resources` indicating the amount of resources (requests / limits) assigned to the nodes in this pool

Author: > While I don't have the data to back up the hunch I'd guess people operating diverse sets of Kafka clusters have very similar Zookeeper clusters (Zookeeper having very different scaling needs to Kafka and I suspect the same holds for Kraft controllers) and would thus benefit from having a standard definition of a controller cluster while maintaining the flexibility to run very different scales of broker cluster.

There will be probably similar pieces of configuration. But I think they might differ and different users might want different pieces to be _reusable_. You talked about storage and resources. Others would want to reuse affinity / tolerations / topology spread constraints rules, etc. I don't think you can solve this by splitting the Strimzi configuration into many small pieces. I think the solution is to solve it on the upper levels.

So, if you are running a large and centrally managed fleet of Kafka clusters, you will probably rely on other means anyway. For example on a custom operator for managing the clusters. Or on some GItOps flows and custom Helm Charts which allows you to decide which configuration should be shared and which should be up to customization. I think leaving the unification of some parts of the custom resources to this layer is much better then creating a separate resource for every single field someone wants share for their fleet of Kafka clusters.

* `template` for customizing the pods and other resources which are part of the nodes in this pool
* `jvmOptions` for customizing the JVM configuration

For example:

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: KafkaNodePool
metadata:
  name: my-pool
  labels:
    strimzi.io/cluster: my-cluster
spec:
  replicas: 3
  resources:
    requests:
      memory: 8Gi
      cpu: 2
    limits:
      memory: 8Gi
      cpu: 4
  jvmOptions:
    -Xms: 2048m
    -Xmx: 2048m
  storage:
    type: jbod
    volumes:
      - id: 0
        type: persistent-claim
        size: 100Gi
        deleteClaim: true
  template:
    podSet:
      metadata:
        labels:
          key1: label1
    pod:
      terminationGracePeriodSeconds: 60
```

The replicas and storage sections will be required in `KafkaNodePool`.
The other fields will be optional.

> When the optional field is not present in `KafkaNodePool` and is present in `Kafka.spec.kafka`, it will default to the configured value from the `Kafka` CR.

Author: I do not find this useful. It just adds more complexity while I think nobody will really follow this. Also, what if the options is configured by the default default? (i.e. the default value for the default value in Kafka CR?)

> When the optional field is not present in `KafkaNodePool` and is present in `Kafka.spec.kafka`, it will default to the configured value from the `Kafka` CR.

Reviewer 5: > Also, what if the options is configured by the default default? (i.e. the default value for the default value in Kafka CR?)

I think you are referring to things like LimiRanges. That's different because they are only applied at the pod admission stage and changing values would only have an effect on new pods. Instead, changing Kafka resources would cause cause a rolling update.

> When the optional field is not present in `KafkaNodePool` and is present in `Kafka.spec.kafka`, it will default to the configured value from the `Kafka` CR.

Author: No. There are fields in the Kafka CR which do have their own defaults when not set. So I think what you suggest here is not really as straightforward and understandable. In any case, it is definitely not something what is key to the proposal. If we see the need for this or some misunderstandings of what values are used, this can be added at any point later.

> When the optional field is not present in `KafkaNodePool` and is present in `Kafka.spec.kafka`, it will default to the configured value from the `Kafka` CR.

Reviewer 5: I agree that this is not key to the proposal and the above status would be confusing, but yet this is a behavior that could be unexpected for some users and make troubleshooting more complicated (you need to combine two different resources). An alternative could be to simply log the KafkaNodePool applied configuration at startup. WDYT?

> When the optional field is not present in `KafkaNodePool` and is present in `Kafka.spec.kafka`, it will default to the configured value from the `Kafka` CR.

Author: I do not see the confusion TBH. But the advantage of this being not a key part of the proposal is that if there actually turns out to be any confusion by the users, then we can decide what to add and where exactly.

Additional protection will be made against undesired moves between different Kafka clusters when the `strimzi.io/cluster` label is modified.
The `.status` section of the `KafkaNodePool` resource will contain the Kafka cluster ID of the cluster it belongs to.
For example:

```yaml=
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: KafkaNodePool
metadata:
  name: my-pool
  labels:
    strimzi.io/cluster: my-cluster
spec:
  # ...
status:
  # ...
  clusterId: cABpUKeDTqi7q_XOtBMgUv
```

The cluster ID is already part of the `Kafka` CR `.status` section.
The operator will check the cluster IDs in every reconciliation and if the cluster IDs don't match between the `Kafka` and `KafkaNodePool` CRs, it will expect that there is some kind of an misconfiguration.
It will throw an `InvalidResourceException` and wait for the user to fix the issue.

### Scaling the node pools

The `KafkaNodePool` resource will also support the `scale` sub-resource.
Support for the `scale` sub-resource should allow integration with Kubernetes Horizontal Pod Autoscaler.
That on its own doesn't really provide fully functional Kafka auto-scaling mechanism.

> For example, if the load is coming from a single partition which is handling too many messages, adding more nodes will not help.

Reviewer 5: Should we keep the scale sub-resource support out of this proposal? 

I think that use cases for the HPA integration are not clear, instead a vertical autoscaler may help with the single partition issue and rebalances. The auto scaling feature deserves its own proposal and it may include the NodePool scale sub-resource improvement. In this proposal we could simply mention that possibility.

Author: I think you are mixing different things. Scale subresource does not mean autoscaling on its own. It means the ability to scale the resource independently without understanding its structure which is the basic building block of autoscaling solution. We already support the scale subresource almost everywhere apart from the `Kafka` CR because that has 2 replicas fields and `KafkaTopic` as partition count cnnot be decreased. So I think having the scale subresource is in sync with the rest of Strimzi.

Reviewer 5: OK, but if scale support is the default, why do we need to mention HPA and auto-scaling in this context? I think this is confusing.

Author: The scale subresource is a key building block for any auto-scaling solution and auto-scaling is something what was asked for by the users in the past. It also plays an important role for the motivation why to use separate custom resource for the node pools. That is why it is worth mentioning in the proposal. But at the same time, I feel like it is important to clarify that this does not mean that this proposal somehow solves auto-scaling. It just respects it as one of the possible future improvements which can build on top of this.

At the same time, the scale subresource is cheap implementation wise. So if nobody uses it because there is no feasible way to autoscale Kafka, then I don't think we care.

|:------|:-----------------------|:-------------------------------------------------------|
| Alpha | 0.35 - 0.37            | Disabled by default                                    |
| Beta  | 0.38 - 0.39            | Enabled by default                                     |
| GA    | 0.40 and newer         | Enabled by default (without possibility to disable it) |

The main purpose of the feature gate is in this case to protect users from a feature which is not mature enough and might be removed in future versions.
Only small parts of the code will actually depend on the feature gate being enabled or disabled.

The annotation `strimzi.io/node-pools: enabled` on the `Kafka` custom resource will be also required in order to use the `KafkaNodePool` resources on a given Kafka cluster.

Since the KRaft mode will be supported only with `KafkaNodePool` resources, the `UseKRaft` feature gate will be configured as dependent on the `KafkaNodePools` feature gate.
It will not be possible to enable `UseKRaft` feature gate without also having `KafkaNodePools` feature gate enabled.

#### Virtual node pool

> To avoid two parallel implementations in the Strimzi source code, the operator will use _virtual node pool_ when the feature gate is disabled.

Reviewer 5: This will be a virtual node pool named `kafka` right?

Author: Yes, it will be named `kafka`. That way, all the resources will have the same names as today.

      inter.broker.protocol.version: "3.3"
    storage:
      type: jbod
      volumes:
        - id: 0
          type: persistent-claim
          size: 1000Gi
          class: fast-storage
  # ...
```

Is equivalent to the following combination of `Kafka` and `KafkaNodePool` resources:

```yaml=
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: Kafka
metadata:
  name: my-cluster
  annotations:
    strimzi.io/node-pools: enabled
spec:
  kafka:
    version: 3.3.1
    listeners:
      - name: plain
        port: 9092
        type: internal
        tls: false
      - name: tls
        port: 9093
        type: internal
        tls: true
    config:
      offsets.topic.replication.factor: 3
      transaction.state.log.replication.factor: 3
      transaction.state.log.min.isr: 2
      default.replication.factor: 3
      min.insync.replicas: 2
      inter.broker.protocol.version: "3.3"
  # ...
---

apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: KafkaNodePool
metadata:
  name: kafka
  labels:
    strimzi.io/cluster: my-cluster
spec:
  replicas: 3
  storage:
    type: jbod
    volumes:
    - id: 0
      type: persistent-claim
      size: 1000Gi
      class: fast-storage
  # ...
```

> Because the `KafkaNodePool` is named `kafka`, all the resources created by this configuration will be exactly the same and have the same names as today.

Reviewer: Is it possible changing the name from `kafka` to something else after the migration?

Author: Well, it depends on how you define _renaming_. You cannot rename Kubernetes resources. So I would say no, you cannot rename it. But of course, once you migrated to Node Pools, you can for example create a new node pool `akfak`, migrate all data to it, and delete the `kafka` node pool. You are not required to keep using the `kafka` node pool forever. But it is a bit more complicated then renaming it.

It will internally (the _virtual node pool_ will not exist as a Kubernetes resource) create the a node pool based on the `Kafka` custom resource and create the resources through this node pool.
The _virtual node pool_ will be named `kafka` which will result in the same names of the Kubernetes resources as we use today.
And since it will copy the configuration from the `Kafka` custom resource, the configuration (e.g. resources, storage etc.) will be the same as before as well.
This significantly simplifies the implementation and testing since the same code will be used all the time.

### Backwards compatibility and migration

When the `KafkaNodePool` feature gate is enabled, users do not need to change anything right away.
They can keep using their existing `Kafka` resources without any changes.
The operator will continue to use the _virtual node pool_ as described in the previous section.

When they decide to start using the actual `KafkaNodePool` resources, they can either:
* Deploy a brand new Kafka cluster with one or more `KafkaNodePool` resources
* Convert their existing Kafka cluster to use node pools

#### Converting existing Apache Kafka clusters

> To convert an existing Kafka cluster to use node pools, the user has to do the following two steps:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
To convert an existing Kafka cluster to use node pools, the user has to do the following:
```

Reviewer 6: as a minimum? or is there more they can do in terms of config at this stage?

      inter.broker.protocol.version: "3.3"
    storage:
      type: jbod
      volumes:
        - id: 0
          type: persistent-claim
          size: 1000Gi
          class: fast-storage
  # ...
```

Is equivalent to the following combination of `Kafka` and `KafkaNodePool` resources:

```yaml=
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: Kafka
metadata:
  name: my-cluster
  annotations:
    strimzi.io/node-pools: enabled
spec:
  kafka:
    version: 3.3.1
    listeners:
      - name: plain
        port: 9092
        type: internal
        tls: false
      - name: tls
        port: 9093
        type: internal
        tls: true
    config:
      offsets.topic.replication.factor: 3
      transaction.state.log.replication.factor: 3
      transaction.state.log.min.isr: 2
      default.replication.factor: 3
      min.insync.replicas: 2
      inter.broker.protocol.version: "3.3"
  # ...
---

apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: KafkaNodePool
metadata:
  name: kafka
  labels:
    strimzi.io/cluster: my-cluster
spec:
  replicas: 3
  storage:
    type: jbod
    volumes:
    - id: 0
      type: persistent-claim
      size: 1000Gi
      class: fast-storage
  # ...
```

> Because the `KafkaNodePool` is named `kafka`, all the resources created by this configuration will be exactly the same and have the same names as today.

Reviewer 6: do we need to say anything about what happens if another name is used?

And all Strimzi based Apache Kafka clusters will have to use the `KafkaNodePool` resources

## Risks

### Eventual consistency

Using multiple resources in Kubernetes is tricky as we have to rely on eventual consistency.
Users can store multiple YAML documents in a single file and apply them with a single command.
But their creation is not a single operation.
It can therefore happen that the operator first sees only the `KafkaNodePool` resources but not the `Kafka` resource or the other way around.
The basic situations can be handled by the operator code.
But it is not completely clear how many problems and various race conditions this might be causing when updating the node pools for existing clusters etc.

The eventual consistency also shows up in situations when you for example decide to scale two of your node pools.
The scale events will be independent and will almost never be caught by the same reconciliation.
So you will have one reconciliation to scale the first pool followed by the second to scale the second one.

## Not impacted

This proposal does not impact in any way how the ZooKeeper nodes, Kafka Exporter, Cruise Control or Entity Operator are configured.

> It also does not impact configuration of the `KafkaConnect`, `KafkaBridge` or other custom resources.

Reviewer 6: is there any expectation that other components might be handled in the same way?

## Rejected alternatives

### KafkaNodePool selector in `.spec.kafka` section of the `Kafka` custom resource

One of the options considered was to have a label selector in the `Kafka` custom resource in `.spec.kafka`.

> Using the `strimzi.io/cluster` label was chosen at the end as the preferred way.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Using the `strimzi.io/cluster` label was preferred in the end.
```

It makes it easier to match the `KafkaNodePool` resources to the `Kafka` cluster.

> This significantly simplifies the code - especially the watch which is triggered when 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
This significantly simplifies the code - especially the watch which is triggered when changes are made.
```

Reviewer 6: Sentence is unfinished. Guessed the ending!

  nodePools: 
    - name: pool1
      replicas: 3
      resources:
        requests:
          memory: 64Gi
          cpu: 8
        limits:
          memory: 64Gi
          cpu: 12
      storage:
        type: jbod
        volumes:
          - id: 0
            type: persistent-claim
            size: 1000Gi
    - name: pool2
      replicas: 3
      resources:
        requests:
          memory: 64Gi
          cpu: 8
        limits:
          memory: 64Gi
          cpu: 12
      storage:
        type: jbod
        volumes:
          - id: 0
            type: persistent-claim
            size: 1000Gi
```

This would have some advantages:

* Having a single resource is easier to work with as it has a clear consistency.
  Using multiple resources means you have to deal with Kubernetes's eventual consistency when updating multiple resources at the same time

And of course also some disadvantages:
* It would not possible to support the `scale` sub-resource and support autoscaling in the future.
* In the past, we had issues with the size of our CRDs.
  Bundling the node pools into the `Kafka` CRD would make it bigger.

## Not addressed

### Migration to KRaft / ZooKeeper-less Kafka

> While this proposal defines how the node pools will provide support for running Apache Kafka in the KRaft mode, they do not focus on the migration of ZooKeeper-based Kafka clusters to KRaft based Kafka clusters.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
While this proposal defines how the node pools will provide support for running Apache Kafka in the KRaft mode, it does not focus on the migration of ZooKeeper-based Kafka clusters to KRaft-based Kafka clusters.
```

metadata:
  name: my-pool
  labels:
    strimzi.io/cluster: my-cluster
spec:
  # ...
status:
  # ...
  clusterId: cABpUKeDTqi7q_XOtBMgUv
```

The cluster ID is already part of the `Kafka` CR `.status` section.
The operator will check the cluster IDs in every reconciliation and if the cluster IDs don't match between the `Kafka` and `KafkaNodePool` CRs, it will expect that there is some kind of an misconfiguration.
It will throw an `InvalidResourceException` and wait for the user to fix the issue.

### Scaling the node pools

The `KafkaNodePool` resource will also support the `scale` sub-resource.
Support for the `scale` sub-resource should allow integration with Kubernetes Horizontal Pod Autoscaler.
That on its own doesn't really provide a fully functional Kafka auto-scaling mechanism.
For example, if the load is coming from a single partition which is handling too many messages, adding more nodes will not help.
So a proper auto-scaling mechanism would need to understand the configuration of topics and partitions and their load to properly scale the broker.
But the `scale` sub-resource would make it easier to develop such solutions in the future.

### KRaft support

> To support the Kafka KRaft mode, a new `roles` filed will be added to the `KafkaNodePool`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To support the Kafka KRaft mode, a new `roles` field will be added to the `KafkaNodePool`.
```

The fact that the node IDs will not be assigned to the pools means the Pods will be mixed.
In a cluster with two pools, they might look like this:

* `my-cluster-big-nodes-0`
* `my-cluster-big-nodes-1`
* `my-cluster-small-nodes-2`
* `my-cluster-small-nodes-3`
* `my-cluster-big-nodes-4`
* `my-cluster-small-nodes-5`

This is anyway unavoidable if we want to allow nodes to move between the pools.

To allow the operator to keep track of the assigned node IDs, it will keep track of them in the `.status` section of the `KafkaNodePool` resource.
That way, it will be able to know at any point in time which IDs are used and which are available.
It will be also able to identify the scale-down or scale-up events using this information.

```yaml=
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: KafkaNodePool
metadata:
  name: big-nodes
  # ...
spec:
  replicas: 3
  # ...
status:
  nodeIds:
    - 0
    - 1
    - 2
  clusterId: cABpUKeDTqi7q_XOtBMgUv
  # replicas and labelSelector fields are needed for the scale subresource
  replicas: 3
  labelSelector: >-
    strimzi.io/cluster=my-cluster,strimzi.io/name=m-cluster-big-nodes,strimzi.io/kind=Kafka
```

> Users will be able to use annotations to indicate to the operator what should be the next ID when scaling up or what should be the node ID which should be removed when scaling down through annotations.

Reviewer 2: Which resources will these annotations be on? I assume it's the node pools themselves, but it's best to be explicit.

So once the ZooKeeper support is removed from Strimzi, we will also remove the support for the _virtual node pool_ and the `strimzi.io/node-pools` annotation.
And all Strimzi based Apache Kafka clusters will have to use the `KafkaNodePool` resources

## Risks

### Eventual consistency

Using multiple resources in Kubernetes is tricky as we have to rely on eventual consistency.
Users can store multiple YAML documents in a single file and apply them with a single command.
But their creation is not a single operation.
It can therefore happen that the operator first sees only the `KafkaNodePool` resources but not the `Kafka` resource or the other way around.
The basic situations can be handled by the operator code.
But it is not completely clear how many problems and various race conditions this might be causing when updating the node pools for existing clusters etc.

The eventual consistency also shows up in situations when you for example decide to scale two of your node pools.
The scale events will be independent and will almost never be caught by the same reconciliation.
So you will have one reconciliation to scale the first pool followed by the second to scale the second one.

> 

Reviewer 2: I guess we should be clear in this section that it's up to the users of the operator to take account of this. We should also mention that the Strimzi documentation will reflect this, for example, by procedures changing individual resources and waiting for readiness, so that the CR changes in any procedure have deterministic serialization.

        tls: true
    config:
      offsets.topic.replication.factor: 3
      transaction.state.log.replication.factor: 3
      transaction.state.log.min.isr: 2
      default.replication.factor: 3
      min.insync.replicas: 2
      inter.broker.protocol.version: "3.3"
  # ...
  nodePools: 
    - name: pool1
      replicas: 3
      resources:
        requests:
          memory: 64Gi
          cpu: 8
        limits:
          memory: 64Gi
          cpu: 12
      storage:
        type: jbod
        volumes:
          - id: 0
            type: persistent-claim
            size: 1000Gi
    - name: pool2
      replicas: 3
      resources:
        requests:
          memory: 64Gi
          cpu: 8
        limits:
          memory: 64Gi
          cpu: 12
      storage:
        type: jbod
        volumes:
          - id: 0
            type: persistent-claim
            size: 1000Gi
```

This would have some advantages:

* Having a single resource is easier to work with as it has a clear consistency.
  Using multiple resources means you have to deal with Kubernetes's eventual consistency when updating multiple resources at the same time

And of course also some disadvantages:

> * It would not possible to support the `scale` sub-resource and support autoscaling in the future.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* It would not be possible to support the `scale` sub-resource and support autoscaling in the future.
```
